Pointers are viewed by many as the bane of C programming, because out-of-control pointers can do a lot of damage, and can be hard to track down. But real programs tend to make heavy use of pointers. How can we keep pointers under control?
The big problem with pointers, of course, is that they can point anywhere, including to places they're not supposed to. When a pointer points to the wrong place (perhaps because it was never initialized properly, such that it essentially points to a random place), a fetch of the data it ``points'' to will result in garbage (or may cause the program to crash with a memory access violation), and a write of some new data to the location it ``points'' to will damage some other part of your program, or of some other program, or of the operating system (or may cause the program to crash). Crashes, in fact, though they're frustrating and annoying, may be preferable to the alternatives, namely performing quiet but meaningless computations or damaging other code, both of which can be even more annoying and even harder to track down.
Our goal, then, is to make sure that our pointers are always valid, or when they are not, to make sure that we can know that they are not. First, then, let's discuss what we mean by a ``valid pointer.''
A valid pointer (more precisely, a valid pointer value) is one that does in fact point to an object of the type that the pointer is declared to point to. Furthermore, if the pointer will be used to store new values, the old value must be sitting in writable memory (that is, it must not be a variable that was declared const, or a string that results from a string literal). In contrast to valid pointers, we may distinguish among several kinds of invalid pointers: null pointers, uninitialized pointers, pointers to memory that used to exist but has disappeared, pointers to memory that once came from malloc but has since been freed.
The tricky thing about valid and invalid pointers is that there's no simple way in C to ask ``is this pointer valid?'' or ``is this pointer invalid?''. The only questions we can ask about pointers are ``is this pointer equal to this other pointer?'', ``is this pointer unequal to this other pointer?'', and, for pointers into the same array, ``is this pointer greater or less than this other pointer?''.
Part one of our strategy for managing pointers, then, will be to arrange that all or most invalid pointers are null pointers. Whenever we do anything which would cause a pointer to be invalid, that is, whenever we declare one (such that it would otherwise have a garbage initial value), or whenever we do something that causes the memory which one of our pointers used to point to to disappear, we'll set the pointer to NULL. Having done so, we can test whether the pointer is currently valid by checking if it's not equal to the null pointer, or contrariwise, we can test whether it's invalid by checking if it's equal to the null pointer.
Remember that C doesn't generally do any of this automatically. It does not guarantee that all newly-allocated pointers are initialized to null pointers, and it does not insert automatic validity checks before you try to use a pointer. If you want to be sure that a pointer is initialized to a null pointer, you must generally set it to NULL. If you have a pointer which you're thinking of using but which might or might not be valid (and if it's a pointer which you believe you'd have set to NULL if it was invalid), you must precede your use of the pointer with a test of the form
if(p != NULL)
Furthermore, if you write the test if(p != NULL), it does not in the general case mean ``is p valid?''. The test if(p != NULL) can only be used to mean ``is p valid?'' if you have taken care to make sure that all non-valid pointers have been set to null.
(There is one condition under which C does guarantee that a pointer variable will be initialized to a null pointer, and that is when the pointer variable is a global variable or a member of a global structure, or more precisely, when it is part of a variable, array, or structure which has static duration.)
Remember, too, that the shorthand form
if(p)is precisely equivalent to if(p != NULL). So you may be able to read if(p) as ``if p is valid'', but again, only if you've ensured that whenever p is not valid, it is set to null.
The degree of care with which you have to implement a pointer management strategy may be different for different pointer variables you use. If a pointer variable is immediately set to a valid pointer value, and if nothing ever happens which could make it become invalid, then there's no need to check it before each time you use it. Similarly, if a pointer is set to point to different locations from time to time, but it can be shown that it will always be valid, there's again no reason to test it all the time. However, if a particular pointer is valid some of the time and invalid at other times, or in particular, if it records some optional data which might or might not be present, then you'll want to be very careful to set the pointer to NULL whenever it's not valid (or whenever the optional data is not present), and to test the pointer before using it (that is, before fetching or writing to the location that it points to).
Everything we've just said about ``pointer variables'' is equally true, and perhaps more important, for pointer fields within structures. When you define a structure, you will typically be allocating many instances of that structure, so you will have many instances of that pointer. You will typically have central pieces of code which operate on instances of that structure, meaning that each time the piece of code runs, it may be operating on a different instance of the structure, so if the pointer field is one that isn't always valid (that is, isn't valid in all instances of the structure), the code had better test it before using it. Similarly, the code had better set the pointer field to NULL if it ever inval
