Practical guide to writing FAANG-ready software engineer resumes
Not sure why you're still not getting shortlisted at some or all of the top tech companies? Your software engineer resume could be the issue.
Having read tons of software engineering resumes as a FAANG interviewer, even some of the most qualified candidates I know fail to get shortlisted due to bad resumes. The mistake most people make is to immediately assume that they weren't qualified enough - but that could be far from the truth.
Thankfully, there are specific steps and requirements you can fulfill to write a good software engineer resume. From your resume structure, content, to free tools you can use to test your resume, I have collated a very concise summary of the best practices to prepare your resume for a FAANG software engineering job application:
- Set up an ATS-friendly resume template
- Fill up your template with well-framed content in a meaningful order
- Optimize your resume with prioritization and keywords
- Test out resume using free tools
How to set up an ATS-friendly software engineer resume
Something most candidates may not realize is that most top tech companies are using some form of Applicant Tracking Systems (ATS) to parse and screen thousands of resumes even before they reach human eyes. In many companies, the ATS may even use certain rules to reject candidates automatically.
While different companies could be using different types of ATS, it is possible to ensure that your software engineer resume is read favorably by most ATS. This section ensures your resume is at least perfectly readable by the ATS, while the next few sections improve your chances of passing ATS screenings.
FAANG Tech Leads is currently offering resume templates and examples at 70% off.
Their templates:
- Are created by ex-FAANG hiring managers based on top resumes received from hundreds of candidate applications
- Guarantee readability by FAANG ATS
- Cater to various experience levels
They also offer resume examples/references from candidates who have received multiple offers from FAANG companies - which are helpful in helping you craft content that meets the same bar. Check it out!
Only use Microsoft Word or Google Docs to create and edit your resume
Do's
- Submit your resume as a PDF file to preserve formatting, but always create it from Microsoft Word or Google Docs. It is important to ensure that the text in your resume is easily highlightable, which is a precondition for easy parsing.
- ATS tools are always trying to improve their readability of standard resume formats - hence the more commonplace your resume format is, the better.
- To maximize space on your resume, rather than using header or footers, reduce the margins of the page - narrow margins are 0.5 on each side.
Don'ts
- Do not use Photoshop, other graphic design tools or online resume builders to build your resume
- Do not use the header or footer sections in a Word/Google Docs file - reduce margins instead and just write the information in the body.
Only use standard fonts of readable sizes
New fonts may convert letters into special characters which are not readable by the ATS. Fonts you should use - Arial, Calibri, Garamond.
Ensure your font size remains readable for humans later on in the hiring process - use a minimum size of 10 pt for readability.
Add sections with standard headings and ordering
ATS readers need to identify and parse standard types of information from your resume. Using standard header titles and ordering can help them do that better.
This is the order which has worked well for me and recommended by recruiters:
| Section | Heading Name |
|---|---|
| Professional summary | (Use resume headline as section title, for e.g. "Senior Software Engineer at Google with over 5 years of experience leading teams") |
| Contact information | "Contact Information" |
| Skills - programming languages, frameworks, etc. | "Skills" |
| Experience | "Work Experience" |
| Education (Note: if you are still in school or have less than 3 years of experience, you may put Education first) | "Education" |
| Projects | "Projects" |
| Other optional sections - e.g. Certifications, Awards, etc | "Awards and Accolades" / "Certifications" / "Awards, Accolades and Certifications" |
Never add symbols to your headers to avoid ATS readability issues.
How to write good Software Engineer resume content
As software engineering is inherently different from other careers in terms of its required skills and experiences, the content expectations for a software engineer resume is also unique. Each of the following paragraphs will cover the content usually expected for software engineers within each resume section:
How to write a professional summary for a software engineer
A good professional summary can be a game changer. Not only does it summarize your entire professional experience in a manner that individual sections cannot, it can also leave a pleasant impression on the hiring manager.
From my personal experience as a software engineering interviewer, I highly recommend professional summaries, as interviewers generally may not have the time to read into the detail - hence summaries which directly address why a candidate is a good fit for the job greatly improves their chances of capturing attention.
Here are my top tips for writing a great software engineering resume summary.
Before you start: List down your best selling points
From your entire professional experience, list down the most important points that fulfill the job descriptions that you are applying for. This can include job experiences or skills.
Summarize the selling points into your resume summary
Summarizing the selling points as much as possible, frame them into a short summary of less than 50 words:
Ensure you do these:
- ✅ Answer why you are a good fit for the job
- ✅ Use an active voice
- ✅ Use action words
- ✅ Start with the noun describing your job role e.g. "Software Engineer", "Front End Engineer"
Write a hea
