Software Engineer interviews: Everything you need to prepare
Nobody has time to grind hundreds of LeetCode questions, and the good news is that you don't need to do that many to actually get the job at FAANG!
I was frustrated at my job at Grab, a ridesharing company in South-east Asia and wanted to break into FAANG but I wasn't sure how to. After a few months of research, studying and practicing, I interviewed at 11 companies and managed to get 9 offers from top tech companies in the Bay Area - Facebook, Google, Airbnb, Palantir, Dropbox, Lyft, and some startups. It was a tedious process which I don't ever want to go through again. I went through that process but with this guide, you don't have to.
This guide will provide a quick overview of the top tips on how to prepare for a software engineer interview - both technical and non-technical interview rounds. Where relevant, you can delve into greater detail by accessing links in this overview article, or through the website's left sidebar.
How to prepare for your software engineering interview:
- Maximize your chances of being shortlisted
- Find out the interview format
- Pick a programming language
- Sharpen your Computer Science fundamentals for interviews
- Practice for the coding interview
- Prepare for the system design interview (for mid/senior levels)
- Prepare for the behavioral interview
- Negotiating the offer package
Maximize your chances of being shortlisted
Do you still have trouble getting shortlisted at some or all of the top tech companies? Your resume could be the issue.
Your resume is the single most important entry point to getting shortlisted in major tech companies like FAANG / MANGA. After getting shortlisted, your past achievements become markedly less important as compared to your coding interview skills - which as we know, can be methodically learnt. Being able to frame your past achievements well enough to get through the screening stage is hence very important.
Unfortunately, even the most qualified candidates I know personally don't know how to write a good resume and fail to get shortlisted. The truth is that when many of us don't get shortlisted at top tech companies like FAANG / MANGA, we tend to think that we were under-qualified - but in most cases, it's probably just the lack of good framing.
If you want to learn how to write a good software engineer resume, I've written a step-by-step guide here on software engineering resume preparation for companies like Google, Facebook, Amazon, Netflix, Apple, with examples for your reference as well.
Find out the interview format
You may encounter various interview formats in your software engineer interviews (from early to late stage):
1. Quiz
Frequency: Occasional
Quizzes are meant to be a first-pass filter as a quick and dirty way of weeding out extremely weak (or even non-technical) candidates. They are structured questions and have clear-cut answers which makes them possible to be administered by recruiters/non-technical folks or automated graders. They are typically done early in the process.
Examples:
- What is 4 & 5 (in binary)? Answer: 4
- What is the time complexity of bubble sort? Answer: O(n2)
2. Online coding assessment
Frequency: Occasional
Like quizzes, online coding assessments are usually given early in the process. An algorithm problem is given with well-formed input and output and candidates are expected to write code in an online coding interface to solve the problem. HackerRank is a very common platform for conducting online coding assessments. LeetCode would be a good way to practice for the problem solving aspects of online coding assessments. However, in HackerRank you are typically expected to write code to read from stdin and also print to stdout, which can trip candidates up if they aren't familiar with the APIs.
3. Take home assignment
Frequency: Rare
There have been numerous debates on whether asking algorithm questions are a good way of assessing individual abilities as they aren't exactly the most relevant skills needed on a day-to-day basis at a job. Take home assignment is a format designed to address the shortcomings of the algorithm interview by getting candidates to work on larger projects which allow them to demonstrate software design skills.
However, this interview format takes up more time from both the candidates and the company and hence it is not as commonly seen in large companies where they have a high volume of candidates. This format is more common among startups and small companies. Examples
- Build a flights listing app
- Build a kanban app
- Build a snake game
4. Phone screen interviews
Frequency: Common
Phone interviews are the most common format and every candidate will face this at least once while interviewing. You will be asked to speak with an interviewer either over a phone call or VoIP (BlueJeans/Skype/Google Hangout). A question will be given to you and you will work on that question using an online collaborative editor (CoderPad/CodePen/Google Docs).
You are usually not allowed to execute the code even if the editor supports execution. So don't rely on that for verifying the correctness of your solution. Formats would differ slightly depending on the roles you are applying to. Many companies like to use CoderPad for collaborative code editing. CoderPad supports running of the program, so it is possible that you will be asked to fix your code such that it can be run. For front end interviews, many companies like to use CodePen, and it will be worth your time to familiarize yourself with the user interfaces of such web-based coding environments.
Check out coding interview best practices as well for do's and don'ts before your phone screen interviews.
5. Onsite
Frequency: Almost always
If you have made it to this stage, congratulations! This is usually the final stage before an offer decision. Candidates who made it to the onsite stage will be required to have an in-person interview at the office. If you are a
