How to Pass the Engineering Interview in 2021
This is a follow-up post to ABC: Always Be Coding. How to Land an Engineering Job from 2013.
Most people dread the idea of going through the interview process, especially engineers. It can be daunting to try and solve complex problems on the spot with someone watching you. Many times I’ve heard coworkers say they probably wouldn’t pass the interview today for the company they already work at. Rejection sucks, and there are too many variables you can’t control when it comes to interviewing. I’ve seen plenty of exceptionally successful engineers fail at interviews. You won’t get an offer every time, but there are principles you can apply and concrete steps you can take to maximize your chances. Below you’ll find some tips and guidelines to gain confidence and prepare for the engineering interview process in 2021.
About you
This guide is for anyone planning to interview for an Engineering role, from entry-level to director, as either an individual contributor (IC) or manager. Depending on what you’re interviewing for, you should expect a some combination of a few types of interviews:
- Coding interviews. You’ll be expected to write code to solve a problem during the interview. This demonstrates to the interviewer that you have the necessary skills to solve technical problems. You’ll find more of these in junior and individual contributor roles.
- Design/architecture interviews. These interviews are more open-ended and are designed to be collaborative. You’ll be expected to solve a design problem, generally on a whiteboard and from both conceptual and practical levels, without writing code. You’ll find these in more senior and individual contributor roles.
- Behavioral/experience interviews. In this interview, you’ll discuss your background, recent work experience, and describe how you handle specific situations found in the workplace. You’ll find this in more senior and management roles.
The entry-level or junior engineer may face four coding interviews and one behavioral. When interviewing as a senior engineer, you may have two coding interviews, two design/architecture, and one behavioral. A director or principal-level candidate may have only one coding interview, two design/architecture, and two behavioral. You get the idea.
About me
I’m a self-taught engineer that has worked at companies such as Google, Square, Postmates, Snapchat, and Bridgewater Associates. I’ve received offers from great companies, like Naughty Dog, Riot Games, Blizzard, Pinterest, Goldman Sachs, Two Sigma, and D.E. Shaw. That’s not to say I haven’t failed interviews–I certainly have, and those are the ones I’ve learned from the most.
I also have a lot of experience on the other side of the table, having interviewed at least 500 engineering candidates over the course of my career, where roughly 10% or fewer were given offers. I hope to share my insights and techniques with you. What follows are some of the most relevant tips to doing well on your technical interviews and avoiding common pitfalls.
Before the interview
Get as much information as possible before the interview. The more you know beforehand, the better prepared you’ll be. Recruiters will sometimes spend ample time preparing you; but if not, you’ll need to ask for information or do your own digging. While being informed is no substitute for performing well in the interviews, it will certainly help orient you in the right direction. The more you know what to expect, the more effective your preparation can be.
Get the names of people you’ll be interviewing with and review their LinkedIn profiles. Sometimes reviewing someone’s background can give you useful insights. You may learn that you share connections or interests. That can help establish rapport in the beginning of the interview and make the interview feel more relaxed. Small things like that can sometimes make all the difference.
For larger companies like Facebook, Amazon, and Google, there’s already a lot of publicly available information on the interview process. But if you want the most accurate and up-to-date information, you should speak with people on the inside. At the very least, it’s the internal recruiter, HR representative, or other points of contact. If you’re working with a headhunter, you should ask to be connected directly with the recruiter that they’re working with. That usually shouldn’t be a problem. If it is, then you should ask why. If it’s still an issue, make sure that person is working for you and getting the information you need.
It’s important to remember that everyone you’re working with wants you to succeed. If you get an offer, everyone wins. The headhunter gets paid, the recruiter gets closer to meeting their goals, and the company brings on more talent. But you need to do the preparation work first in order to set yourself up for success.
Coding interviews
There will probably be at least one interview where you’re expected to produce some code for any role in the Engineering org. Depending on the role and scope, it may be several interviews or just one. Either way, failing here can sink your chances entirely, so it’s important to be prepared.
Can you pass coding interviews without preparing for them? Of course, but you shouldn’t assume you’re prepared because you spend your free-time coding or do so on the job. Focused practice will best prepare you for coding interviews. This type of practice is deliberate and goal-oriented, where you set aside time and focus on improving your skills. What you practice should be informed by everything you know about the upcoming interview. If you’re unsure, then ask your recruiter what you should expect. Will you have to write code that executes? Or will you write pseudocode on the whiteboard? What types of coding questions should be expected? Sometimes the recruiter will provide sample problems and that’s a great place to start.
Coding interview preparation tips
ABC (Always Be Coding). The
