Discuss this article in the forums
The first step towards an understanding of why the study and knowledge of algorithms are so important is to define exactly what we mean by an algorithm. According to the popular algorithms textbook Introduction to Algorithms (Second Edition by Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson, Ronald L. Rivest, Clifford Stein), “an algorithm is any well-defined computational procedure that takes some value, or set of values, as input and produces some value, or set of values as output.” In other words, algorithms are like road maps for accomplishing a given, well-defined task. So, a chunk of code that calculates the terms of the Fibonacci sequence is an implementation of a particular algorithm. Even a simple function for adding two numbers is an algorithm in a sense, albeit a simple one.
Some algorithms, like those that compute the Fibonacci sequences, are intuitive and may be innately embedded into our logical thinking and problem solving skills. However, for most of us, complex algorithms are best studied so we can use them as building blocks for more efficient logical problem solving in the future. In fact, you may be surprised to learn just how many complex algorithms people use every day when they check their e-mail or listen to music on their computers. This article will introduce some basic ideas related to the analysis of algorithms, and then put these into practice with a few examples illustrating why it is important to know about algorithms.
One of the most important aspects of an algorithm is how fast it is. It is often easy to come up with an algorithm to solve a problem, but if the algorithm is too slow, it’s back to the drawing board. Since the exact speed of an algorithm depends on where the algorithm is run, as well as the exact details of its implementation, computer scientists typically talk about the runtime relative to the size of the input. For example, if the input consists of N integers, an algorithm might have a runtime proportional to N2, represented as O(N2). This means that if you were to run an implementation of the algorithm on your computer with an input of size N, it would take C*N2 seconds, where C is some constant that doesn’t change with the size of the input.
However, the execution time of many complex algorithms can vary due to factors other than the size of the input. For example, a sorting algorithm may run much faster when given a set of integers that are already sorted than it would when given the same set of integers in a random order. As a result, you often hear people talk about the worst-case runtime, or the average-case runtime. The worst-case runtime is how long it would take for the algorithm to run if it were given the most insidious of all possible inputs. The average-case runtime is the average of how long it would take the algorithm to run if it were given all possible inputs. Of the two, the worst-case is often easier to reason about, and therefore is more frequently used as a benchmark for a given algorithm. The process of determining the worst-case and average-case runtimes for a given algorithm can be tricky, since it is usually impossible to run an algorithm on all possible inputs. There are many good online resources that can help you in estimating these values.
Approximate completion time for algorithms, N = 100
| O(Log(N)) | 10-7 seconds |
| O(N) | 10-6 seconds |
| O(N*Log(N)) | 10-5 seconds |
| O(N2) | 10-4 seconds |
| O(N6) | 3 minutes |
| O(2N) | 1014 years |
| O(N!) | 10142 years |
Sorting provides a good example of an algorithm that is very frequently used by computer scientists. The simplest way to sort a group of items is to start by removing the smallest item from the group, and put it first. Then remove the next smallest, and put it next and so on. Unfortunately, this algorithm is O(N2), meaning that the amount of time it takes is proportional to the number of items squared. If you had to sort a billion things, this algorithm would take around 1018 operations. To put this in perspective, a desktop PC can do a little bit over 109 operations per second, and would take years to finish sorting a billion things this way.
Luckily, there are a number of better algorithms (quicksort, heapsort and mergesort, for example) that have been devised over the years, many of which have a runtime of O(N * Log(N)). This brings the number of operations required to sort a billion items down to a reasonable number that even a cheap desktop could perform. Instead of a billion squared operations (1018) these algorithms require only about 10 billion operations (1010), a factor of 100 million faster.
Algorithms for finding the shortest path from one point to another have been researched for years. Applications abound, but lets keep things simple by saying we want to find the shortest path from point A to point B in a city with just a few streets and intersections. There are quite a few different algorithms that have been developed to solve such problems, all with different benefits and drawbacks. Before we delve into them though, lets consider how long a naive algorithm – one that tries every conceivable option – would take to run. If the algorithm considered every possible path from A to B (that didn’t go in circles), it would not finish in our lifetimes, even if A and B were both in a small town. The runtime of this algorithm is exponential in the size of the input, meaning that it is O(CN) for some C. Even for small values of C, CN becomes astronomical when N gets even moderately large.
One of the fastest algorithms for solving this problem has a runtime of O(EVLog(V)), where E is the number of road segments, and V is the number of intersections. To put this in perspective, the algorithm would take about 2 seconds to find the shortest path in a city with 10,000 intersections, and 20,000 road segments (there are usually about 2 road segments per intersection). The algorithm, known as Djikstra’s Algorithm, is fairly compl
