Cache replacement policies
In computing, cache replacement policies (also known as cache replacement algorithms or cache algorithms) are optimizing instructions or algorithms which a computer program or hardware-maintained structure can utilize to manage a cache of information. Caching improves performance by keeping recent or often-used data items in memory locations which are faster, or computationally cheaper to access, than normal memory stores. When the cache is full, the algorithm must choose which items to discard to make room for new data.
Overview
[edit]The average memory reference time is[1]
where
- = miss ratio = 1 - (hit ratio)
- = time to make main-memory access when there is a miss (or, with a multi-level cache, average memory reference time for the next-lower cache)
- = latency: time to reference the cache (should be the same for hits and misses)
- = secondary effects, such as queuing effects in multiprocessor systems
A cache has two primary figures of merit: latency and hit ratio. A number of secondary factors also affect cache performance.[1]
The hit ratio of a cache describes how often a searched-for item is found. More efficient replacement strategies track more usage information to improve the hit rate for a given cache size. The latency of a cache describes how long after requesting a desired item the cache can return that item when there is a hit. Faster replacement strategies typically track less usage information—or, with a direct-mapped cache, no information—to reduce the time required to update the information. Each replacement strategy is a compromise between hit rate and latency.
Hit-rate measurements are typically performed on benchmark applications, and the hit ratio varies by application. Video and audio streaming applications often have a hit ratio near zero, because each bit of data in the stream is read once (a compulsory miss), used, and then never read or written again. Many cache algorithms (particularly LRU) allow streaming data to fill the cache, pushing out information which will soon be used again (cache pollution).[2] Other factors may be size, length of time to obtain, and expiration. Depending on cache size, no further caching algorithm to discard items may be needed. Algorithms also maintain cache coherence when several caches are used for the same data, such as multiple database servers updating a shared data file.[citation needed]
Policies
[edit]Bélády's algorithm
[edit]The most efficient caching algorithm would be to discard information which would not be needed for the longest time; this is known as Bélády's optimal algorithm, optimal replacement policy, or the clairvoyant algorithm. Since it is generally impossible to predict how far in the future information will be needed, this is unfeasible in practice. The practical minimum can be calculated after experimentation, and the effectiveness of a chosen cache algorithm can be compared.
When a page fault occurs, a set of pages is in memory. In the example, the sequence of 5, 0, 1 is accessed by Frame 1, Frame 2, and Frame 3 respectively. When 2 is accessed, it replaces value 5 (which is in frame 1, predicting that value 5 will not be accessed in the near future. Because a general-purpose operating system cannot predict when 5 will be accessed, Bélády's algorithm cannot be implemented there.
Random replacement (RR)
[edit]Random replacement selects an item and discards it to make space when necessary. This algorithm does not require keeping any access history. It has been used in ARM processors due to its simplicity,[3] and it allows efficient stochastic simulation.[4]
Simple queue-based policies
[edit]First in first out (FIFO)
[edit]With this algorithm, the cache behaves like a FIFO queue; it evicts blocks in the order in which they were added, regardless of how often or how many times they were accessed before.
Last in first out (LIFO) or First in last out (FILO)
[edit]The cache behaves like a stack, and unlike a FIFO queue. The cache evicts the block added most recently first, regardless of how often or how many times it was accessed before.
SIEVE
[edit]SIEVE is a simple eviction algorithm designed specifically for web caches, such as key-value caches and Content Delivery Networks. It uses the idea of lazy promotion and quick demotion.[5] Therefore, SIEVE does not update the global data structure at cache hits and delays the update till eviction time; meanwhile, it quickly evicts newly inserted objects because cache workloads tend to show high one-hit-wonder ratios, and most of the new objects are not worthwhile to be kept in the cache. SIEVE uses a single FIFO queue and uses a moving hand to select objects to evict. Objects in the cache have one bit of metadata indicating whether the object has been requested after being admitted into the cache. The eviction hand points to the tail of the queue at the beginning and moves toward the head over time. Compared with the CLOCK eviction algorithm, retained objects in SIEVE stay in the old position. Therefore, new objects are always at the head, and the old objects are always at the tail. As the hand moves toward the head, new objects are quickly evicted (quick demotion).[6]
Simple recency-based policies
[edit]Least Recently Used (LRU)
[edit]Discards least recently used items first. This algorithm requires keeping track of what was used and when, which is cumbersome. It requires "age bits" for cache lines, and tracks the least recently used cache line based on these age bits. When a cache line is used, the age of the other cache lines changes. LRU is a family of caching algorithms, that includes 2Q by Theodore Johnson and Dennis Shasha[7] and LRU/K by Pat O'Neil, Betty O'Neil and Gerhard Weikum.[8] The access sequence for the example is A B C D E D F:
When A B C D is installed in the blocks with sequence numbers (increment 1 for each new access) and E is accessed, it is a miss and must be installed in a block. With the LRU algorithm, E will replac
