Command pattern
This article includes a list of references, related reading, or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. (December 2012) |
In object-oriented programming, the command pattern is a behavioral design pattern in which an object is used to encapsulate all information needed to perform an action or trigger an event at a later time. This information includes the method name, the object that owns the method and values for the method parameters.
Four terms always associated with the command pattern are command, receiver, invoker and client. A command object knows about receiver and invokes a method of the receiver. Values for parameters of the receiver method are stored in the command. The receiver object to execute these methods is also stored in the command object by aggregation. The receiver then does the work when the execute()
method in command is called. An invoker object knows how to execute a command, and optionally does bookkeeping about the command execution. The invoker does not know anything about a concrete command, it knows only about the command interface. Invoker object(s), command objects and receiver objects are held by a client object. The client decides which receiver objects it assigns to the command objects, and which commands it assigns to the invoker. The client decides which commands to execute at which points. To execute a command, it passes the command object to the invoker object.
Using command objects makes it easier to construct general components that need to delegate, sequence or execute method calls at a time of their choosing without the need to know the class of the method or the method parameters. Using an invoker object allows bookkeeping about command executions to be conveniently performed, as well as implementing different modes for commands, which are managed by the invoker object, without the need for the client to be aware of the existence of bookkeeping or modes.
The central ideas of this design pattern closely mirror the semantics of first-class functions and higher-order functions in functional programming languages. Specifically, the invoker object is a higher-order function of which the command object is a first-class argument.
Overview
[edit]The command[1] design pattern is one of the twenty-three well-known GoF design patterns that describe how to solve recurring design problems to design flexible and reusable object-oriented software, that is, objects that are easier to implement, change, test, and reuse.
Using the command design pattern can solve these problems:[2]
- Coupling the invoker of a request to a particular request should be avoided. That is, hard-wired requests should be avoided.
- It should be possible to configure an object (that invokes a request) with a request.
Implementing (hard-wiring) a request directly into a class is inflexible because it couples the class to a particular request at compile-time, which makes it impossible to specify a request at run-time.
Using the command design pattern describes the following solution:
- Define separate (command) objects that encapsulate a request.
- A class delegates a request to a command object instead of implementing a particular request directly.
This enables one to configure a class with a command object that is used to perform a request. The class is no longer coupled to a particular request and has no knowledge (is independent) of how the request is carried out.
See also the UML class and sequence diagram below.
Structure
[edit]UML class and sequence diagram
[edit]In the above UML class diagram, the Invoker
class doesn't implement a request directly.
Instead, Invoker
refers to the Command
interface to perform a request (command.execute()
), which makes the Invoker
independent of how the request is performed.
The Command1
class implements the Command
interface by performing an action on a receiver (receiver1.action1()
).
The UML sequence diagram
shows the run-time interactions: The Invoker
object calls execute()
on a Command1
object.
Command1
calls action1()
on a Receiver1
object,
which performs the request.
UML class diagram
[edit]Uses
[edit]- GUI buttons and menu items
- In Swing and Borland Delphi programming, an
Action
is a command object. In addition to the ability to perform the desired command, an Action may have an associated icon, keyboard shortcut, tooltip text, and so on. A toolbar button or menu item component may be completely initialized using only the Action object. - Macro recording
- If all user actions are represented by command objects, a program can record a sequence of actions simply by keeping a list of the command objects as they are executed. It can then "play back" the same actions by executing the same command objects again in sequence. If the program embeds a scripting engine, each command object can implement a toScript() method, and user actions can then be easily recorded as scripts.
- Mobile code
- Using languages such as Java where code can be streamed/slurped from one location to another via URLClassloaders and Codebases the commands can enable new behavior to be delivered to remote locations (EJB Command, Master Worker).
- Multi-level undo
- If all user actions in a program are implemented as command objects, the program can keep a stack of the most recently executed commands. When the user wants to undo a command, the program simply pops the most recent command object and executes its undo() method.
- Networking
- It is possible to send whole command objects across the network to be executed on the other machines, for example player actions in computer games.
- Parallel processing
- Where the commands are written as tasks to a shared resource and executed by many threads in parallel (possibly on remote machines; this variant is often referred to as the Master/Worker pattern)
- Progress bars
- Suppose a program has a sequence of commands that it executes in order. If each command object has a
