One common type of interview problem is one that asks you to find the k best elements, with "best" being defined by the problem. The easiest way to solve these problems is to just sort the input according to the criteria defined in the problem, and then return the top k elements. This has a time complexity of if n is the length of the input. Using a heap, we can instead find the top k elements in . Logically, k < n , so this is an improvement. Practically, because is so fast anyway, it probably isn't a big deal in terms of a speed increase. But when interviewers give you these kinds of problems, it is these small improvements that they are looking for. What is the improvement? Create a min heap at the start, iterate over the input while pushing every element on the heap (according to the problem's criteria), and pop from the heap once the size exceeds k . Because the heap's size is bounded by k , all heap operations are at worst . Multiply this by n iterations to get . Because we are using a min heap and we are popping from the heap according to the problem criteria, pops remove the "worst" elements. As a result, the k "best" elements will remain in the heap. Let's look at some examples. Example 1: 347. Top K Frequent Elements Given an integer array nums and an integer k , return the k most frequent elements. It is guaranteed that the answer is unique. We can use a hash map to find and store the frequency of each element. Then, we can sort the hash map keys using a custom comparator (according to their values). This will result in a time complexity of where n = nums.length . When you pop from a min heap, it removes the smallest element in logarithmic time. We can find the frequencies using a hash map like before, and then put the keys with their frequencies in the heap. When the heap's size exceeds k , we can pop from the heap in time. Since we limited the size of the heap to k , the heap will hold the k most frequent elements in the end, with a time complexity of . Click here for a more detailed explanation if needed First, find the frequency of all elements using a hash map. Next, create a min heap and iterate over the hash map. For each element, put it on the heap as a pair ( frequency, element ). The important part here is that the frequency is first because then the heap will evaluate the "value" of the pair based on the frequency. Because it's a min heap, the element that gets popped is the element with the lowest value, i.e. the element with the lowest frequency. Once the heap's size exceeds k , pop from the heap - this will remove the element with the lowest frequency. Let's say that we have an arbitrary element x that is part of the answer (one of the top k most frequent elements). x will never be popped from the heap, regardless of the order in which the elements are iterated over. If x was popped from the heap, it would mean that the heap size is greater than k and x is the least frequent of the elements in the heap. This implies that there are at least k elements that appear more frequently than x , which directly contradicts what x is. Thus, at the end of the iteration, the heap must hold the answer. Given as the length of nums , the time complexity of this algorithm is . Counting the frequencies only costs , which will be dominated. In the main loop, we iterate times and perform some heap operations. The size of the heap never exceeds , so each iteration costs . The space complexity is for the hash map used to count the frequencies and the heap. Example 2: 658. Find K Closest Elements Given a sorted integer array arr , two integers k and x , return the k closest integers to x . The answer should also be sorted in ascending order. If there are ties, take the smaller elements. In the last problem, we wanted the maximum frequencies, so we put the frequencies in a heap. In this problem, we want the minimum differences, so let's put the differences in a heap. When we wanted the maximums, we used a min heap so that pops would remove the smaller elements. In this problem, we want the smallest differences, so if we use a max heap, then pops will remove the largest differences. The problem states that ties should be decided by taking the smaller element. For example, let's say we have x = 5 and two numbers 3, 7 . Both have an equal distance of 2 , but we should consider the 3 as having a "better" score since it is less than 7 . How do we handle ties with a heap? This is dependent on the language you are using. In a language like Python or C++, you can put an ordered collection (like a tuple or list) in the heap, and it will go through each entry individually to determine the value. Using the same example with x = 5 and 3, 7 , we could push both (2, 3) and (2, 7) to our max heap. The first element 2 in these tuples indicates the difference from x = 5 . The second element in these tuples are the elements themselves. When determining which tuple has a "larger" value, the heap will compare the first position and see that they are equal. It will then move to the second position and see that 7 > 3 , and thus 7 would be popped first. In a language like Java, you will need to implement a custom comparator which is a function that explicitly tells your heap how to handle the tiebreak case. The time complexity of this algorithm is , where is the length of the input array. The heap size never grows beyond k , so the push and pop operations are , which we perform times. Then, we need at the end to sort the output. This algorithm is actually pretty slow compared to other approaches since it does not exploit the fact that the input array is sorted - but we're using it as an example of how heaps can be used in "top k" problems. This approach is still faster than sorting with a custom comparator, which is the trivial approach. This pattern is a relatively straightforward one but still a good one to know because interviewers will be looking for any and all optimizations. Try solving the next problem using this method before moving on.
