Difference arrays are not super common, but it's good to have them under your belt because it would be difficult to derive the idea on the spot in an interview. Difference arrays are used when you have a problem involving intervals of events. You can think of the events all occuring along a number line. This number line can represent time or position. Events happen on this number line, with a starting and ending point. The input will either provide a 2D array, where each inner array is in the format [left, right, value] , or some equivalent form. The story behind the problem will usually be something along the lines of "between left and right , there is value of something". Let's look at some examples. Example 1: 1094. Car Pooling A car has room for capacity passengers, and is given an array trips . Each trip is represented by [numPassengers, from, to] , which indicates that at from , it picks up numPassengers , then drops them off at to . Can it complete all the trips without holding more passengers than capacity at any time? In this problem, the number line is a road. Each trip is an event and appears on the number line at location from and leaves the number line at location to . During the event, numPassengers occupy the car. Regarding the input format we mentioned above, we have from as left , to as right , and numPassengers as value . What we can do is build the number line with an array. First, we need to find the maximum value of to , let's call it farthest . Then, we can initialize the road as an array arr with length farthest + 1 . Now, for each event, we know that numPassengers enter the car at location from . So we can perform arr[from] += numPassengers . At location to , numPassengers will leave the car, so we can perform arr[to] -= numPassengers . After processing all events, the values of arr will indicate the change in passengers at each position. Now, we can just do a simple prefix sum on the road and check if at any point the number of passengers (the prefix sum) exceeds capacity . This algorithm gives us a time and space complexity of , where m = max(trip[2] for trip in trips) . Without this method, we would have to sort trips , which would give a time complexity of . The difference array method is building this array representing the change in passengers at each position, then using a prefix sum. We said above that the input format should be [left, right, value] , or an equivalent form. What is meant by equivalent form? Example 2: You are on a street with street lights, represented by an array lights . Each light is given as [position, radius] , which means that the light is located at position , and shines to the left and right at a distance of radius . Let's say the brightest spot on the street is the spot where the most lights are shining. Return any such position. Note that the street is extremely long - position <= 10^18 . Here is an example of an equivalent form. The problem doesn't mention the lights having different brightnesses, so value = 1 for all lights. left can be calculated as position - radius , and right can be calculated as position + radius . Since the problem mentions that the street is very long, it would be too expensive to use the same method as in the first example where we "build" the street and then walk along it. What we can do instead is build an array change where each element is [position, value] , indicating that the brightness changes by value at position . The logic here is identical to the original method - when we enter a light's coverage left , the brightness increases by value . When we exit a light's coverage right , the brightness decreases by value . Then, we can sort the array and walk over it with a prefix sum. As mentioned in the first example, by sorting, the time complexity becomes . This was necessary because the street is very long - using the first method would be too slow since position can be up to . It's important to recognize when to use the first or second approach to the method. The logic for the "walk" is very similar - it's just the "building" part that is different, and the correct decision will depend on the constraints of the problem.
