One of the most common applications of a hash map or set is determining if an element exists in . Since an array needs to do this, using a hash map or set can improve the time complexity of an algorithm greatly, usually from to . Let's look at some example problems. Example 1: 1. Two Sum Given an array of integers nums and an integer target , return indices of two numbers such that they add up to target . You cannot use the same index twice. Let's quickly think about how we could solve this problem with a brute force approach. We could simply check every pair of numbers and see if they add up to target . Use one for loop to iterate over the array and at each iteration, lock in a number num . Then use an inner for loop which looks for target - num in the array (because num + target - num = target ). This algorithm is slow because the inner loop (whose purpose is to find target - num ) costs . Thus, the time complexity would be . With a hash map, we can look for target - num in , which would greatly improve the time complexity to . We can build a hash map as we iterate along the array, mapping each value to its index. At each index i , where num = nums[i] , we can check our hash map for target - num . Adding key-value pairs and checking for target - num are all , so our time complexity will improve to . Click here for a more detailed explanation if needed We are looking for two numbers that sum to target . We iterate over the input and for each element num , we see if this element can be paired with another number to form target . If another element target - num exists, then their sum num + target - num = target is what we are looking for. So as we iterate over the input, we put elements in a hash map. Then in the future, we can check if we've seen target - num for each num in . The problem wants us to return the indices instead of the numbers themselves, so we can associate each number with its index. If the question wanted us to return a boolean indicating if a pair exists or to return the numbers themselves, then we could just use a set. However, since it wants the indices of the numbers, we need to use a hash map to "remember" what indices the numbers are at. The time complexity is as the hash map operations are . This solution also uses space as the number of keys the hash map will store scales linearly with the input size. Example 2: 2351. First Letter to Appear Twice Given a string s , return the first character to appear twice. It is guaranteed that the input will have a duplicate character. The brute force solution would be to iterate along the string, and for each character c , iterate again up to c to see if there is any match. This is due to the nested loop. The second loop is checking for the existence of c , which can be done in using a set. This improves our time complexity to as each for loop iteration now runs in constant time. The space complexity is a more interesting topic of discussion. Many people will argue that the space complexity is because the input can only have characters from the English alphabet, which is bounded by a constant (26). This is very common with string problems and technically correct. In an interview setting, this is probably a safe answer, but you should also note that the space complexity could be , where is the number of allowable characters in the input. This is a more general answer and also technically correct. Example 3: Given an integer array nums , find all the numbers x in nums that satisfy the following: x + 1 is not in nums , and x - 1 is not in nums . If a valid number x appears multiple times, you only need to include it in the answer once. We can solve this in a straightforward manner - just iterate through nums and check if x + 1 or x - 1 is in nums . By converting nums into a set beforehand, these checks will cost . Converting the input into a set beforehand is another example of pre-processing. Because the checks are , the time complexity is since each for loop iteration runs in constant time. The set will occupy space. Anytime you find your algorithm running if ... in ... , then consider using a hash map or set to store elements to have these operations run in . Try these upcoming practice problems with what was learned here.
