In this article, we will introduce a framework for solving DP problems. This framework is great for beginners as it works for any DP problem and provides a systematic way to develop algorithms, so it's a great tool to remember. For this article, we're going to use Min Cost Climbing Stairs as an example. We will start with a top-down solution. You are given an integer array cost where cost[i] is the cost of the step on a staircase. Once you pay the cost, you can either climb one or two steps. You can either start from the step with index 0, or the step with index 1. Return the minimum cost to reach the top of the floor (outside the array, not the last index of cost ). It is recommended that you open the problem link in a new tab so you can easily follow along. The framework To create any DP algorithm, there are 3 main components. 1. A function or data structure that will compute/contain the answer to the problem for any given state Since we're starting with top-down, we will be talking about a function here. This involves two parts. First, we need to decide what the function is returning. Second, we need to decide on what arguments the function should take (state variables). The problem is asking for the minimum cost to climb the stairs. So, let's define a function dp(state) that returns the minimum cost to climb the stairs for a given state . What state variables do we need? The only relevant state variable would be an index along the input, let's call it i . A good way to think about state variables is to imagine if the problem was a real-life scenario. What information do you need to 100% describe a scenario? We certainly need to know what step we're on - that's where i comes in. What about the color of your socks? Standing on the 5th step with green socks is technically a different state than standing on the 5th step with red socks, but it doesn't change the cost of the steps, or anything relevant. Therefore, let's have a function dp(i) that returns the minimum cost to climb the stairs up to the step - i.e. if the input was the subarray from index 0 up to and including i . As mentioned in the previous article, this is an extremely common way to use an index as a state variable: the state i represents the input from indices 0 until i . 2. A recurrence relation to transition between states A recurrence relation is an equation used to calculate states. With Fibonacci, the recurrence relation was . In this problem, let's say we wanted to figure out the minimum cost of climbing to the step. The problem states that at each step, we are allowed to take one or two steps. That means, to get to the step, we must have arrived from the or step. Therefore, the minimum cost of climbing to the step is either the minimum cost of getting to the step + the cost of the step, or the minimum cost of getting to the step + the cost of the step. dp(100) = min(dp(99) + cost[99], dp(98) + cost[98]) Because of how we defined dp in the previous step, dp(99) gives us the minimum cost of getting to the step, and dp(98) gives us the minimum cost of getting to the step. Or more generally: dp(i) = min(dp(i - 1) + cost[i - 1], dp(i - 2) + cost[i - 2]) Which is the recurrence relation of this problem. Typically, finding the recurrence relation is the hardest part of constructing a DP algorithm. This one is relatively straightforward, but we'll see later that recurrence relations can be much more complicated. 3. Base cases The recurrence relation is useless on its own. We still can't figure out dp(100) because we don't know dp(99) or dp(98) . If we try to find them, we have the same problem - how can we know dp(98) if we don't know dp(97) or dp(96) ? By itself, the recurrence relation will continue forever until dp(-infinity) . We need base cases so that our function eventually returns actual values. The problem states that we can start at steps 0 or 1 . Therefore, the base cases are: dp(0) = dp(1) = 0 With these base cases, we can find dp(2) . With dp(2) , we can find dp(3) , and so on until we have dp(98) and dp(99) , then we can finally find dp(100) . Figuring out the base cases is usually pretty easy and just requires a little bit of logical thinking. Make sure to read every question carefully. Implementation Let's take the three parts of the framework and combine them for an algorithm. Don't forget to memoize the function to improve the time complexity from to , where is the length of the input array. Converting a top-down solution to a bottom-up one As discussed in the previous article, there are some benefits of using bottom-up instead of top-down. Sometimes, an interviewer may ask for both approaches. The following is a general method for converting a top-down recursive solution to a bottom-up iterative one. Start by implementing the top-down approach. Initialize an array that is sized according to the state variables. For example, let's say the input to the problem was an array and an integer that represents the maximum number of actions allowed. Your array would be 2D with one dimension of length and the other of length . In the top-down approach, we had a function dp . We want these two to be equivalent. For example, the value of dp(4, 6) can now be found in dp[4][6] . Set your base cases, same as the ones you are using in your top-down function. In the example we just looked at, we had dp(0) = dp(1) = 0 . We can initialize our dp array values to 0 to implicitly set this base case. As you'll see soon, other problems will have more complicated base cases. Write a for-loop(s) that iterate over your state variables. If you have multiple state variables, you will need nested for-loops. These loops should start iterating from the base cases and end at the answer state . Now, each iteration of the inner-most loop represents a given state, and is equivalent to a function call to the same state in top-down. Copy-paste the logic from your function into the for-loop and change the function calls to accessing your array. All changes into . We're done! is now an array populated with the answer to the original problem for all possible states. Return the answer to the original problem, by changing to . Here's a bottom-up implementation of the same algorithm from above. Let's jump into some example DP problems in the next article.
