Counting is a very common pattern with hash maps. By "counting", we are referring to tracking the frequency of things. This means our hash map will be mapping keys to integers. Anytime you need to count anything, think about using a hash map to do it. Recall that when we were looking at sliding windows, some problems had their constraint as limiting the amount of a certain element in the window. For example, longest substring with at most k 0 s. In those problems, we could simply use an integer variable curr because we are only focused on one element (we only cared about 0 ). A hash map opens the door to solving problems where the constraint involves multiple elements. Let's start by looking at a sliding window example that leverages a hash map. Example 1: You are given a string s and an integer k . Find the length of the longest substring that contains at most k distinct characters. For example, given s = "eceba" and k = 2 , return 3 . The longest substring with at most 2 distinct characters is "ece" . This problem deals with substrings and has a constraint on the substrings (at most k distinct characters). These characteristics let us know that we should consider sliding window. Remember, the idea of a sliding window is to add elements by sliding to the right until the window violates the constraint. Once it does, we shrink the window from the left until it no longer violates the constraint. In this problem, we are concerned with the number of distinct characters in the window. The brute force way to check for this constraint would be to check the entire window every time, which could take time. Using a hash map, we can check the constraint in . Let's use a hash map counts to keep count of the characters in the window. This means we will map letters to their frequency. The length (number of keys) in counts at any time is the number of distinct characters. When we remove from the left, we can decrement the frequency of the elements being removed. When the frequency becomes 0 , we know this character is no longer part of the window, and we can delete the key. Click here for a more detailed explanation if needed Please review the sliding window article if you have forgotten the sliding window algorithm. In this problem, the constraint metric is "how many unique characters are in the window". The numeric restriction is <= k . We can use a hash map counts that keeps track of the frequency of each character in the window. The length of counts is the number of keys, which is also the constraint metric. Therefore the window is invalid when counts.length > k . When we add a character s[right] , we increment its frequency in counts by one. If it doesn't exist in counts , we insert a new key value pair s[right]: 1 . When we remove a character s[left] , we decrement its frequency in counts by one. If the frequency becomes 0 , we know that this character no longer exists. Therefore we delete the key from the hash map, which also decreases the length of counts . Recall that the length of a window is right - left + 1 . In Python, the collections module provides very useful data structures. We will be using a defaultdict in the Python code. Functionality-wise, a defaultdict is the same as a hash map, it's just more pleasant to work with. As you can see, using a hash map to store the frequency of any key we want allows us to solve sliding window problems that put constraints on multiple elements. We know from earlier that the time complexity of sliding window problems are if the work done inside each for loop iteration is amortized constant, which is the case here due to a hash map having operations. The hash map occupies space, as the algorithm will delete elements from the hash map once it grows beyond . Example 2: 2248. Intersection of Multiple Arrays Given a 2D array nums that contains n arrays of distinct integers, return a sorted array containing all the numbers that appear in all n arrays. For example, given nums = [[3,1,2,4,5],[1,2,3,4],[3,4,5,6]] , return [3, 4] . 3 and 4 are the only numbers that are in all arrays. The problem states that each individual array contains distinct integers. This means that a number appears n times if and only if it appears in all arrays. Let's use a hash map counts to count the frequency of elements. We iterate over each of the inner arrays and update counts with every element. After going through all the arrays, we can iterate over our hash map to see which numbers appear n times. This problem is a good discussion point for why a hash map is convenient. You may be thinking, since our keys are integers, why can't we just use an array instead of a hash map? We could, but the problem is that the array needs to be at least as large as the maximum element. What if we have a test case like [1, 2, 3, 1000] ? We need to initialize an array of size 1001 (to use arr[1000] to track how many times 1000 appears), and nearly all of the indices will be unused. Therefore, using an array could end up being a huge waste of space. Sure, sometimes it would be more efficient because of the overhead of a hash map, but overall, a hash map is much safer. Even if 99999999999 is in the input, it doesn't matter - the hash map handles it like any other element. Let's say that there are lists and each list has an average of elements. To populate our hash map, it costs to iterate over all the elements. The next loop iterates over all unique elements that we encountered. If all elements are unique, this can cost up to , although this won't affect our time complexity since the previous loop also cost . Finally, there can be at most elements inside ans when we perform the sort, which means in the worst case, the sort will cost . This gives us a time complexity of . If every element in the input is unique, then the hash map will grow to a size of , which means the algorithm has a space complexity of . Example 3: 1941. Check if All Characters Have Equal Number of Occurrences Given a string s , determine if all characters have the same frequency. For example, given s = "abacbc" , return true, because all characters appear twice. Given s = "aaabb" , return false. "a" appears 3 times, "b" appears 2 times. 3 != 2 . Using our knowledge of hash maps and sets, this is a straightforward problem. Use a hash map counts to count all character frequencies. Iterate through s and get the frequency of every character. Check if all frequencies are the same. Because a set ignores duplicates, we can put all the frequencies in a set and check if the length is 1 to verify if the frequencies are all the same. Click here for a more detailed explanation if needed Recall from the first article of the chapter that sets ignore frequency. If you add the same element to a set 100 times, the first operation will add it, then the next 99 will do nothing. In this problem, we want to determine if there exists only one unique frequency. We can first find the frequencies by counting each character using a hash map. After counting, the values of the hash map are our frequencies. If there is only one unique frequency, then after adding all the values to a set, the set will have a length of 1. If there are any characters with different frequencies, then the set would have a length greater than 1, as it would hold all unique frequencies. Given as the length of s , it costs to populate the hash map, then to convert the hash map's values to a set. This gives us a time complexity of . The space that the hash map and set would occupy is equal to the number of unique characters. As previously discussed, some people would argue that this is since the characters come from the English alphabet, which is bounded by a constant. A more general answer would be to say that the space complexity is , where is the number of characters that could be in the input, which happens to be 26 in this problem. Bonus Python one liner using collection's Counter : Count the number of subarrays with an "exact" constraint In the sliding window article from chapter 1, we talked about a pattern "find the number of subarrays/substrings that fit a constraint". In those problems, if you had a window between left and right that fit the constraint, then all windows from i to right also fit the constraint, where left < i <= right . For this pattern, we will be looking at problems with stricter constraints, so that the property just mentioned is not necessarily true. For example, "Find the number of subarrays that have a sum less than k" with an input that only has positive numbers would be solved with sliding window. In this section, we would be talking about questions like "Find the number of subarrays that have a sum exactly equal to k ". At first, some of these problems may seem very difficult. However, the pattern is very simple once you learn it, and you'll see how similar the code is for each problem that falls in this pattern. To understand the algorithm, we need to recall the concept of prefix sums. The sum of any subarray can be found as the difference between two prefix sums. Let's say that you wanted to find subarrays that had a sum exactly equal to k , and you also had a prefix sum array of the input. You know that any difference in the prefix sum array equal to k represents a subarray with a sum equal to k . So how do we find these differences? Let's first declare a hash map counts that maps prefix sums to how often they occur (a number could appear multiple times in a prefix sum if the input has negative numbers or zeroes, for example, given nums = [1, -1, 1] , the prefix sum is [1, 0, 1] and 1 appears twice). We need to initialize counts[0] = 1 . This is because the empty prefix [] has a sum of 0 . You'll see why this is necessary in a second. Now, let's iterate over the input and maintain the sum of the current prefix in a variable curr . At any given time, curr represents the sum of all the elements we have iterated over so far. We'll also maintain counts by incrementing the frequency of curr at each iteration. Remember, counts is counting how many times a sum has appeared in a prefix. The big question: how do we calculate the answer? Recall that in the sliding window article, when we were looking for the "number of subarrays", we focused on each index and figured out how many valid subarrays ended at the current index. Essentially, we locked in the right bound and calculated how many left bounds could match it. We will do the same thing here. Let's say that we're at an index i . We know a few things: Up until this point, curr stores the prefix of all elements up to i . We have stored all other prefixes before i inside of counts . The difference between any two prefix sums represents a subarray. For example, if you wanted the subarray starting at index 3 and ending at index 8 , you would take the prefix up to 8 and subtract the prefix up to 2 from it. Now, imagine there exists a subarray that beginning at index j and ending at index i with a sum of k . Consider the sum of the prefix ending at j - 1 (the elements up to, but not including the start of the subarray). According to our assumptions: The sum of the prefix up to i is curr . The sum of the subarray from j to i is k . Thus, the sum of the prefix ending at j - 1 must be curr - k . In this image, the subarray between j and i has a sum of k . The sum of the prefix ending at i is 14 (which we keep track of in curr ). At some point earlier, curr was equal to 11 (the prefix ending before j ). This is equal to curr - k . This is the key idea: if we saw the prefix sum curr - k before, it necessarily implies that there is a subarray ending at i with a sum of k . We don't know where the beginning of this subarray is; we just know it exists, but that's enough to solve the problem. Therefore, we can increment our answer by counts[curr - k] . If the prefix curr - k occurred multiple times before (due to negative numbers or zero), then each of those prefixes could be used as a starting point to form a subarray ending at the current index with a sum of k . That's why we need to track the frequency. Let's use a concrete example to better illustrate this idea. Imagine we had nums = [0, 1, 2, 3, 4] and k = 5 . Let's jump to i = 3 . Currently, curr = 6 (remember, curr is tracking the prefix sum up to i ). We also have 0 , 1 , and 3 in counts (all the prefix sums we have encountered so far). At this point, we can see that there is a subarray ending at i with a sum of k - it's [2, 3] . How does our algorithm see it though? The current prefix sum is 6 . We want a subarray with a sum of 5 . Thus, if there was a prefix sum of 1 earlier, you could just subtract that prefix from the current one, and you'll get a subarray sum of 5 . In this case, we had a prefix [0, 1] which has a prefix sum of 1 . We can subtract that from the current prefix [0, 1, 2, 3] and we're left with [2, 3] , which has our target sum. Remember in 1. Two Sum , we wanted target . We locked in a number num and searched for target - num . Here, we lock in curr and search for curr - k , because curr - (curr - k) = k . In Two Sum, we dealt with numbers in the array directly. Here, we deal with prefix sums of the array. Example 4: 560. Subarray Sum Equals K Given an integer array nums and an integer k , find the number of subarrays whose sum is equal to k . Let's walk through an example to see why the algorithm described above works for this problem. Let's say we have nums = [1, 2, 1, 2, 1], k = 3 . There are four subarrays with sum 3 - [1, 2] twice and [2, 1] twice. The prefix sum for this input, which is what curr represents during iteration, is [1, 3, 4, 6, 7] . You can see that there are three differences in this array of 3 : (4 - 1) , (6 - 3) , (7 - 4) . But we said that there are four valid subarrays? Recall that we need to initialize our hash map with 0: 1 , considering the empty prefix. This is because if there is a prefix with a sum equal to k , then without initializing 0: 1 , curr - k = 0 wouldn't show up in the hash map and we would "lose" this valid subarray. So at indices 1, 2, 3, and 4, we find curr - k has been seen prior. The elements are all positive so each value of curr - k only showed up once, and hence our answer is 4 . You may be thinking, if curr is only increasing, then no value in the hash map is greater than 1, couldn't we just use a set? This would be true if the array only had positive numbers - however, the constraints say -1000 <= nums[i] <= 1000 . Let's think about an example: nums = [1, -1, 1, -1], k = 0 . There are four valid subarrays: [1, -1] twice, [-1, 1] once, and the entire array [1, -1, 1, -1] . The prefix sum is [1, 0, 1, 0] . There are two subarrays ending on the final index - [1, -1] and the entire array. Remember that we initialize counts[0] = 1 , so after the second index, we have counts[0] = 2 . So when we reach the final index and do ans += counts[curr - k] = ans += counts[0] , we are adding both subarrays to our answer. When there are non-positive numbers in the input, the same prefix can occur multiple times , and a hash map is needed to count the frequency. To summarize: We use curr to track the prefix sum. At any index i , the sum up to i is curr . If there is an index j whose prefix is curr - k , then the sum of the subarray with elements from j + 1 to i is curr - (curr - k) = k . Because the array can have negative numbers, the same prefix can occur multiple times. We use a hash map counts to track how many times a prefix has occurred. At every index i , the frequency of curr - k is equal to the number of subarrays whose sum is equal to k that end at i . Add it to the answer. The time and space complexity of this algorithm are both , where is the length of nums . Each for loop iteration runs in constant time and the hash map can grow to a size of elements. Example 5: 1248. Count Number of Nice Subarrays Given an array of positive integers nums and an integer k . Find the number of subarrays with exactly k odd numbers in them. For example, given nums = [1, 1, 2, 1, 1], k = 3 , the answer is 2 . The subarrays with 3 odd numbers in them are [ 1, 1, 2, 1 , 1] and [1, 1, 2, 1, 1 ] . In the previous example, the constraint metric was a sum, so we had curr record a prefix sum. In this problem, the constraint metric is odd number count . Therefore, let's have curr track the count of odd numbers. At every element, we can query curr - k again. In the example test case, at the final index, curr = 4 because there are 4 odd numbers in the array. At the first index, curr = 1 . This means that the subarray starting after the first index until the last index has 4 - 1 = 3 = k odd numbers, and you can see that the subarray from index 1 to 4 is one of the answers ( [1, 1, 2, 1, 1 ] ). We can check if a number is odd by taking it mod 2. If x is odd, then x % 2 = 1 . Click here for a more detailed explanation if needed Although we are not using sliding window, we can still use the same idea when it comes to "valid" subarrays. In the previous example, the constraint metric was "sum of a subarray" and the numeric restriction was == k . In this problem, the constraint metric is "count of odd numbers in a subarray" and the numeric restriction is also == k . We have to get a little creative with prefix sums here. Instead of using curr to track prefix sum, we have it track the number of odd numbers we have seen in the current prefix. You could call it the "prefix odd count". If curr - k exists, it means that there was a prefix earlier with curr - k odd numbers. The current prefix has curr odd numbers. The difference between them represents the number of odd numbers in the subarray between the prefixes, which is curr - (curr - k) = k odd numbers. If a number is odd, then when you take it mod 2, the result will be 1 . Otherwise, it will be 0 . Therefore we can easily perform curr += num % 2 for each number. From here, everything else works the exact same way. Seriously, compare the code between the two problems. The time and space complexity of this algorithm is identical to the previous problem's ( for both) for the same reasons. Remember when we said, "you'll see how similar the code is for each problem that falls in this pattern"? Two different problems and the difference in the code is literally 2 characters, " % 2 ". Note that while not all problems that follow this pattern will use identical code, they will all still be very similar. Try these next few practice problems on your own to apply the knowledge from this article.
