Here are code templates for common patterns for all the data structures and algorithms looked at in LICC . Two pointers: one input, opposite ends Two pointers: two inputs, exhaust both Sliding window Build a prefix sum Efficient string building In JavaScript, benchmarking shows that concatenation with += is faster than using .join() . Linked list: fast and slow pointer Reversing a linked list Find number of subarrays that fit an exact criteria Monotonic increasing stack The same logic can be applied to maintain a monotonic queue. Binary tree: DFS (recursive) Binary tree: DFS (iterative) Binary tree: BFS Graph: DFS (recursive) For the graph templates, assume the nodes are numbered from 0 to n - 1 and the graph is given as an adjacency list. Depending on the problem, you may need to convert the input into an equivalent adjacency list before using the templates. Graph: DFS (iterative) Graph: BFS Find top k elements with heap Binary search Binary search: duplicate elements, left-most insertion point Binary search: duplicate elements, right-most insertion point Binary search: for greedy problems If looking for a minimum: If looking for a maximum: Backtracking Dynamic programming: top-down memoization To convert a top-down solution to a bottom-up one: Initialize an array that is sized according to the state variables. For example, let's say the input to the problem was an array and an integer that represents the maximum number of actions allowed. Your array would be 2D with one dimension of length and the other of length . In the top-down approach, we had a function dp . We want these two to be equivalent. For example, the value of dp(4, 6) can now be found in dp[4][6] . Set your base cases, same as the ones you are using in your top-down function. In the example we just looked at, we had dp(0) = dp(1) = 0 . We can initialize our dp array values to 0 to implicitly set this base case. As you'll see soon, other problems will have more complicated base cases. Write a for-loop(s) that iterate over your state variables. If you have multiple state variables, you will need nested for-loops. These loops should start iterating from the base cases and end at the answer state . Now, each iteration of the inner-most loop represents a given state, and is equivalent to a function call to the same state in top-down. Copy-paste the logic from your function into the for-loop and change the function calls to accessing your array. All changes into . We're done! is now an array populated with the answer to the original problem for all possible states. Return the answer to the original problem, by changing to . Build a trie Dijkstra's algorithm
