Congratulations on reaching the end of the course! What now? We said at the start that the best way to learn is by doing. There was a lot of information in this course - now it's time to apply what you've learned. For each chapter's topic, you should: Be comfortable with implementing in your favorite language Understand the time and space complexity of basic operations Know the advantages and be able to recognize when you should use it Next steps Our recommendation: focus on one topic at a time. Once you gain a good understanding and comfort with a given topic, you won't lose it for a long time. Solve 5 to 10 of the problems for each topic, or as many as you want until you feel comfortable. A good start would be the bonus problems at the end of each chapter. If you are ever stuck on a problem, don't just stare at it for an hour. Read the official solution if available, or go to the discuss section and look at the solution there. Make sure you 100% understand the algorithm, then move on to the next problem, and come back to the problem you were stuck on in a few days or a week. Other than solving problems, LeetCode also has several other features. There are simulated interviews by company , study plans , weekly contests , and more. The contests are a great way to practice for interviews - every contest has 4 new questions - usually an easy, two mediums, and a hard, with only 90 minutes to finish, simulating a high pressure timed environment. You can also do virtual contests for any of the past ~500+ contests. If you haven't already, you can also join the discord server to discuss the course with others, including the course author. Click here to join . If you would like to provide a testimonial for the course, information can be found in the discord server. Further learning In this course, we talked about the most common and fundamental data structures and algorithms. If you want to learn more data structures and algorithms, here are our recommendations: These topics are far less common than the ones we learned, but they're still good to know if you have the time. Union Find Topological Sort Quickselect Radix sort/Pigeonhole principle Minimum spanning tree (Kruskal's) The following are names you may have seen but they're more advanced topics and unlikely to show up in an interview: Fenwick tree Segment tree Suffix tree Bellman-Ford, or any other non-Dijkstra's shortest path algorithm Rolling hash/Rabin Karp/KMP Thanks for taking the course! Regardless of if you had never solved an algorithm problem or were already an expert, hopefully your skills and confidence have improved from this course.
