There is a more creative way to use binary search - on a solution space/answer. A very common type of problem is "what is the max/min that something can be done". Binary search can be used if the following criteria are met: You can quickly (in or better) verify if the task is possible for a given number x . If the task is possible for a number x , and you are looking for: A maximum, then it is also possible for all numbers less than x . A minimum, then it is also possible for all numbers greater than x . If the task is not possible for a number x , and you are looking for: A maximum, then it is also impossible for all numbers greater than x . A minimum, then it is also impossible for all numbers less than x . The 2nd and 3rd requirements imply that there are two "zones". One where it is possible and one where it is impossible. The zones have no breaks, no overlap, and are separated by a threshold. When a problem wants you to find the min/max, it wants you to find the threshold where the task transitions from impossible to possible. First, we establish the possible solution space by identifying the minimum possible answer and the maximum possible answer. Next, we binary search on this solution space. For each mid , we perform a check to see if the task is possible. Depending on the result, we halve the search space. Eventually, we will find the threshold. If the first requirement is met (quick verification if mid is possible), then this will give us a time complexity of , where is the solution space's range. Even if the possible solution space is huge, logarithms run so fast that this is a very efficient time complexity. We can write a function check that takes an integer and checks if the task is possible for that integer. In most cases, the algorithm we use in this function will be a greedy one. Let's take a look at some examples. Example 1: 875. Koko Eating Bananas Koko loves to eat bananas. There are n piles of bananas, the pile has piles[i] bananas. Koko can decide her bananas-per-hour eating speed of k . Each hour, she chooses a pile and eats k bananas from that pile. If the pile has less than k bananas, she eats all of them and will not eat any more bananas during the hour. Return the minimum integer k such that she can eat all the bananas within h hours. If we have an eating speed k , and the task is possible, then all eating speeds greater than k will also work. If it isn't possible, then all eating speeds slower than k will not work. This means that we can binary search for the answer. Given an eating speed k , how can we check if all the piles can be eaten within h ? Because Koko can only eat from one pile per hour, we can look at the piles individually. If a pile has bananas bananas, how long does it take to get through the pile? Even if there is only one banana left over, regardless of k , it will take an extra hour. This means it takes bananas / k rounded up time. We can loop over the piles and find the sum of bananas / k for each pile, and check if that is less than or equal to h . For the binary search, the bounds should start at the minimum and maximum possible answer. The minimum possible answer is 1 - Koko needs to eat more than 0 bananas per hour! The maximum possible answer is max(piles) . There isn't any point in having an eating speed faster than this. Click here for a more detailed explanation if needed There are multiple steps to identifying the usage of binary search and then the implementation. First, the problem is asking for the minimum eating speed. If Koko can eat all the bananas with a speed of k , she can surely eat all the bananas with a speed of k + 1 as well. If she cannot, she surely cannot with a speed of k - 1 either. This creates the two "zones". Next, we need to identify the search space bounds. No matter what the input is, we know the eating speed can never be lower than 1 because the eating speed must be an integer, and an eating speed of 0 would mean no bananas ever get eaten. If the eating speed is max(piles) , then each pile will take one hour. It is impossible to improve on this (since the problem states that even if the eating speed is greater than the number of bananas in a pile, it will still take one hour). Therefore, our search space is [1, max(piles)] . Finally, we need to figure out how to implement the check function for a given eating speed k . The problem statement says that if a pile has less than k bananas, Koko will eat them all and then not eat anymore for the rest of the hour. If a pile has 8 bananas and Koko has an eating speed of 3 , then Koko can eat 6 bananas in 2 hours, leaving 2 bananas left in the pile. Koko then needs to spend another hour eating the remaining 2 bananas. The number of hours required to eat a pile of bananas with an eating speed of k is bananas / k , rounded up. We can iterate over the input, sum the values of bananas / k , and check if it is within the limit. With the search space identified and check function implemented, we can perform a binary search to find the threshold. check runs in time, where n = piles.length . The binary search runs in time, where k = max(piles) . This gives us a time complexity of , which is very fast since is an extremely fast function. We don't use any extra space except for a few integer variables. Example 2: 1631. Path With Minimum Effort You are given heights , a positive 2D array of size m x n , where heights[row][col] represents the height of cell (row, col) . You can move up, down, left, or right. A path's effort is the largest absolute difference you can have between any two consecutive cells traversed. Return the minimum effort required to get from the top left to the bottom right. If you cannot make the journey with effort , then it's impossible to do it with any number less than effort . If you can do it, then it's possible to do it with all numbers greater than effort . Given an integer effort , how can we check if a path exists? We can do a simple DFS, starting from (0, 0) , with edges being in the 4 directions and only traversable if the difference between the current node and the next one is less than or equal to effort . For our binary search, what should the bounds start at? The minimum possible effort is 0 - there could exist a path where all the numbers are the same. The maximum possible effort is the largest number in the input since the input doesn't have negative numbers. Click here for a more detailed explanation if needed Let's go through the same steps as in the previous example. First, the problem is asking for the minimum effort. If the task is possible for a given effort , then that means there is some path where all adjacent cells have a difference less than or equal to effort . Surely, the task is also possible with effort + 1 , because the path we speak of will also be traversable if we increase the maximum allowed difference. Similarly, if the task is not possible for a given effort , it will surely be impossible with effort - 1 . If no path existed, then lowering the maximum allowed difference will not create a path. We have identified the two zones. Next, we need to identify the search space. Given an arbitrary input, the task might be possible with 0 effort (for example, if every square had the same value). If the largest number in the input is x , we will never need more than x effort. Negative numbers aren't allowed, so there couldn't possibly exist a difference between two elements greater than x . We have identified our search space as [0, x] . Finally, we need to implement the check function for a given effort. We can model the matrix as a graph like we did many times in the trees and graphs chapter. Perform a DFS from the top left square and attempt to reach the bottom right square. Only traverse to a neighbor if the difference between the nodes is less than or equal to effort . The DFS runs in time, and the binary search runs it times, where k is the maximum element in the input. This gives a time complexity of . To perform the DFS, we are using space for the stack and seen . Example 3: 1870. Minimum Speed to Arrive on Time You are given a float hour , representing the amount of time you have to reach the office. To commute to the office, you must take n trains in sequential order. You are also given an integer array dist , where dist[i] describes the distance of the train ride. Each train can only depart at an integer hour, so you may need to wait in between each train ride. For example, if the 1st train ride takes 1.5 hours, you must wait for an additional 0.5 hours before you can depart on the 2nd train ride at the 2-hour mark. Return the minimum positive integer speed that all the trains must travel at for you to reach the office on time, or -1 if it is impossible to be on time. The answer will not exceed . This problem is fairly similar to Koko Eating Bananas. If we have a speed k , and a train has a distance d , then the train takes d / k time. The problem has an added constraint that trains only depart on integer hours - so we also need to round our time up before taking each train. The minimum possible speed is 1 , and the maximum is as given in the problem description. The fact that the problem is giving us this information is actually a hint towards using binary search, but it brings up a good question - what do you do when you cannot ascertain a maximum possible answer from what is given in the input? You can use an arbitrarily large number for right , like . Logarithms are so fast that it will hardly make a difference. The task can also just be impossible in general - the problem says we should return -1 if it is. When is it impossible? Because each train only departs on an integer, even if we have a ridiculously high speed, each train will take at least 1 hour (exception being the last train may take less than that). Therefore, if there are more trains than hours allowed, it is impossible. Note: in the check function, we don't take the ceiling of the final value because we don't need to wait for any more trains. The rounding up is to simulate waiting for the next train at the next integer hour. Technically, this problem has a time complexity of , where is the length of the input array, because the problem explicitly tells us that the maximum answer is , and the logarithm of this is a constant. However, it would be more appropriate to say that the algorithm has a time complexity of , where is the maximum possible answer. We don't use any extra space except for a few integer variables. A note on implementation All 3 examples we looked at in this article asked for a minimum . In all solutions, we return left . If a problem is instead asking for a maximum , then left will not actually be the correct answer at the end. Instead, we should return right . Why does left point to the answer when looking for a minimum, but right points to the answer when looking for a maximum? Let's say we're looking for a minimum and the answer is x . After doing check(x) , we set right = x - 1 because check(x) will return true, and we move the right bound to look for a better answer. As you can see, the correct answer is actually outside of our search space now. That means every future iteration of check is going to fail, which means we will continuously increase left until eventually we try check(x - 1) . This will fail and set left = (x - 1) + 1 = x . Our while loop terminates because left > right , and left is at the answer. If we are instead looking for a maximum, after performing check(x) , we set left = x + 1 . Again, the correct answer is outside of the search space and all future checks will fail. Eventually, we try check(x + 1) , fail, and set right = (x + 1) - 1 = x . The loop terminates because right < left , and right is pointing at the answer. In the Interviews and tools chapter, there is an article with code templates. In this article, there is a code template for binary searching on a solution space for both scenarios (looking for a maximum and a minimum). Try the upcoming practice problems on your own before moving on to the binary search quiz.
