Binary search is a common optimization to a linear scan when searching for an element's index or insertion point if it doesn't exist. In these problems, left and right represent the bounds of the subarray we are currently considering. mid represents the index of the middle of the current search space. Sometimes, you will directly be binary searching for the answer. Other times, binary search will just be a tool that speeds up your algorithm. Let's look at some examples. A note on implementing binary search: Many people get confused when implementing binary search: how should you initialize the right bound? Do you run while left < right or left <= right ? Do you update with mid + 1 or mid ? What about mid - 1 or mid ? Our advice: check out the templates provided in the "Interviews and tools" chapter. When solving problems, don't ponder on the implementation details and simply copy-paste the templates. For interviews, you can either commit the templates to memory or have them open in another tab or a piece of paper during the interview. Example 1: 704. Binary Search You are given an array of integers nums which is sorted in ascending order, and an integer target . If target exists in nums , return its index. Otherwise, return -1 . We'll start with a simple example to show the code implementation. The brute force solution would be to perform a linear scan - just check every index. This runs in , where is the length of the input array. Because the array is sorted, we can use binary search to improve the time complexity to . We don't use any extra space except for a few integer variables. Example 2: 74. Search a 2D Matrix Write an efficient algorithm that searches for a value target in an m x n integer matrix matrix . Integers in each row are sorted from left to right. The first integer of each row is greater than the last integer of the previous row. Because each row is sorted and fully less than the next row, we can treat the matrix as one array. This hypothetical single array has a length of m * n . If we consider the indices between [0, m * n - 1] , then how do we find the row and column that each index converts to? Each row has n elements. That means that row 0 is indices [0, n - 1] . Row 1 is indices [n, 2 * n - 1] , and so on. This is equivalent to the floor division of n , aka row = i // n - the row increments every n indices. The column can range between [0, n - 1] . Every n indices, the column resets to 0 . This is perfect for the modulo operator. col = i % n . Then, we can just binary search on this hypothetical single array. The following image demonstrates the indices of this hypothetical single array on the 2d matrix. Click here for a more detailed explanation if needed We need to reduce this problem to the previous example so we can apply the same binary search algorithm. Let's say that there are n columns. Each row has n elements. The first n indices belong to row 0. The next n indices belong to row 1, and so on. If an element is in row , then there are row * n elements above it in the grid. Given an index i , we can find the row it belongs to by dividing by n . For example, in the image, index 9 belongs to row 2 . There are four elements per row and we have 9 / 4 = 2 . This makes sense as there are eight elements above row 2 , so indices 8, 9, 10, 11 all belong to row 2 . To find the column given an index i , we just take i % n . Index 0 belongs to the column, and then every n indices we are back in the column. Index 1 belongs to the column, and then every n indices we are back in the column. Because each column is spaced by n indices, the modulus operator gives us the column. Once we can convert an index i to a (row, col) , we can treat the matrix as a normal array and perform a binary search over it, like we did in the previous example. Because there are elements, the initial search space has a size of , which means this algorithm has a time complexity of . We don't use any extra space except for a few integer variables. Example 3: 2300. Successful Pairs of Spells and Potions You are given two positive integer arrays spells and potions , where spells[i] represents the strength of the spell and potions[j] represents the strength of the potion. You are also given an integer success . A spell and potion pair is considered successful if the product of their strengths is at least success . For each spell, find how many potions it can pair with to be successful. Return an integer array where the element is the answer for the spell. Let's say n = spells.length and m = potions.length . The brute force approach would be to iterate over all pairs and checking which ones have a product greater than success, which has a time complexity of . If a spell has a strength x , then it will form a successful pair with any potion with a strength of at least success / x . If we sort potions , then we can perform a binary search for success / x to find the index of the insertion point. Since we know the length of potions , we also then know how many potions have a strength of at least success / x . If i is the insertion point, then there are m - i potions. Click here for a more detailed explanation if needed Let's say we sort potions and have potions = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] , and success = 7 . We have a spell with a strength of 3 . To form a successful pair, we need a potion with a strength of at least 7 / 3 = 2.3333 . If we do a binary search for this value on potions , we will find an insertion index of 2 . Every potion on this index and to the right can form a successful pair. There are 3 indices in total (the potions with strength 3, 4, 5 ). In general, if there are m potions, the final index is m - 1 . If the insertion index is i , then the range [i, m - 1] has a size of (m - 1) - i + 1 = m - i . We can iterate over the spells, and for each spell, perform a binary search on success / spell to find the insertion index i , then use the formula to find the number of potions that can form a successful pair. To sort potions, it costs . Then, we iterate times, performing a binary search on each iteration. This gives us a time complexity of , which is much faster than because is small. Because we are sorting the input, some space is used depending on the sorting algorithm used by your language. Binary searching on an array is a simple tool to improve an algorithm's time complexity by a huge amount. Anytime you have a sorted array (or are able to sort an array without consequence), consider using binary search to quickly find the insertion index of a desired element. Try these upcoming practice problems before moving on to the next pattern.
