A trie is a tree data structure, also known as a prefix tree . Usually, a trie stores characters of a string at each node. All paths from the root to a node represent a string of characters on the path (an idea we have seen extensively in this course). For example: Tries can be used to efficiently implement string searching/matching algorithms. Let's say you have a huge list of words and a stream of characters (like someone typing). By building a trie, you can keep track of which words have the characters as a prefix. The following code can be used to build a trie (for an array of strings words ): There are multiple ways you can build a trie, and this is only one of them. Building a trie takes time, where n is the length of words and k is the average length of the strings in words . Once you have the trie, you can implement very efficient string searching algorithms. The code above builds a tree like in the image shown above. Example: 1268. Search Suggestions System You are given an array of strings products and a string searchWord . Design a system that suggests at most three product names from products after each character of searchWord is typed. Suggested products should share a common prefix with searchWord . If there are more than three products with a common prefix, choose the three lexicographical minimums. Return a list of lists of the suggested products after each character of searchWord is typed. As searchWord is typed, a prefix is formed. For example, if searchWord = "abcde" , then the prefixes after each character are "a", "ab", "abc", "abcd", "abcde" . For each prefix, we need to find (up to) 3 of the lexicographically smallest words from products that share the prefix. The brute force approach would be to iterate over products for each prefix and check which ones match. This would have a time complexity of , where n = products.length and m = searchWord.length . It would cost us to build a trie from products where is the average length of each product, and then we could find all the words with matching prefixes in just time. Because k is small, this time complexity of is much better. Remember: each node in the trie represents a prefix, with the root representing the empty string. We can use an attribute suggestions to store the 3 products that should be returned. To stay in line with the problem's constraints, we will limit the size to 3 and keep it sorted (which is cheap since the size is limited to 3). Once the trie is built, we can traverse the tree by starting at the root and iterating over searchWord . At each node, the trie instantly gives us the answer. The code we used to build the trie is the same as the template given at the start of this article, with a small modification: we have an attribute suggestions that we maintain at each node. Try implementing a trie yourself with this upcoming practice problem.
