Binary search is a search algorithm that runs in in the worst case, where is the size of the search space. For binary search to work, your search space usually needs to be sorted. Binary search trees, which we looked at in the trees and graphs chapter, are based on binary search. Normally, binary search is done on an array of sorted elements, but you can use binary search in more creative ways, as we'll see in an upcoming article. For now, we'll just talk about sorted arrays of numbers. If you have a sorted array arr and an element x , then in time and space, binary search can: Find the index of x if it is in arr Find the first or the last index in which x can be inserted to maintain being sorted otherwise Here's the idea behind binary search: Let's say that there is a sorted integer array arr , and you know that the number x is in it, but you don't know at what index. You want to find the position of x . Start by checking the element in the middle of arr . If this element is too small, then we know every element in the left half will also be too small, since the array is sorted. Similarly, if the element is too large, then every element in the right half will also be too large. We can discard the half that can't contain x , and then repeat the process on the other half. We continue this process of cutting the array in half until we find x . This is how binary search is implemented: Declare left = 0 and right = arr.length - 1 . These variables represent the inclusive bounds of the current search space at any given time. Initially, we consider the entire array. While left <= right : Calculate the middle of the current search space, mid = (left + right) // 2 (floor division) Check arr[mid] . There are 3 possibilities: If arr[mid] = x , then the element has been found, return. If arr[mid] > x , then halve the search space by doing right = mid - 1 . If arr[mid] < x , then halve the search space by doing left = mid + 1 . If you get to this point without arr[mid] = x , then the search was unsuccessful. The left pointer will be at the index where x would need to be inserted to maintain arr being sorted. Because the search space is halved at every iteration, binary search's worst-case time complexity is . This makes it an extremely powerful algorithm as logarithmic time is very fast compared to linear time. You have probably used binary search in real life without even realizing it. For example, if you have ever looked up a word in a dictionary, then you probably flipped to about the middle, looked at the first letter of the words on the page you flipped to, and then either checked the left or right half depending on the first letter of the word you were looking for. Implementation template Here are example code implementations: In the Java and C++ implementations, instead of doing (left + right) / 2 , we do left + (right - left) / 2 to avoid overflow. The equations are equivalent, but the second one makes sure that no value greater than right is ever stored. In Python and JavaScript, numbers don't overflow (or at least, the limit is ridiculously huge), so we are fine with having left + right potentially being large. Note that this template should only be used on arrays without duplicates. Duplicate elements If your input has duplicates, you can modify the binary search template to find either the first or the last position of a given element. If target appears multiple times, then the following template will find the left-most index: The following template will find the right-most insertion point (the index of the right-most element plus one): Regarding both of the above templates, if the element you are searching for does not exist, then left will be at the index where the element should be inserted to maintain sorted order (just like in a normal binary search). Note that you can also use these templates on arrays without duplicate elements. Let's jump into example problems to see how binary search can be used. You should think about binary search anytime the problem provides anything sorted. is extremely fast and binary search is usually a huge optimization.
